The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Secret Adversary, by Agatha Christie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Secret Adversary

Author: Agatha Christie

Posting Date: September 14, 2008 [EBook #1155]
Release Date: January, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET ADVERSARY ***




Produced by Charles Keller





THE SECRET ADVERSARY

By Agatha Christie


               TO ALL THOSE WHO LEAD
               MONOTONOUS LIVES
               IN THE HOPE THAT THEY MAY EXPERIENCE
               AT SECOND HAND
               THE DELIGHTS AND DANGERS OF
               ADVENTURE



CONTENTS

     Prologue
     I      The Young Adventurers, Ltd.
     II     Mr. Whittington's Offer
     III    A Set Back
     IV     Who Is Jane Finn?
     V      Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer
     VI     A Plan of Campaign
     VII    The House in Soho
     VIII   The Adventures of Tommy
     IX     Tuppence Enters Domestic Service
     X      Enter Sir James Peel Edgerton
     XI     Julius Tells a Story
     XII    A Friend in Need
     XIII   The Vigil
     XIV    A Consultation
     XV     Tuppence Receives a Proposal
     XVI    Further Adventures of Tommy
     XVII   Annette
     XVIII  The Telegram
     XIX    Jane Finn
     XX     Too Late
     XXI    Tommy Makes a Discovery
     XXII   In Downing Street
     XXIII  A Race Against Time
     XXIV   Julius Takes a Hand
     XXV    Jane's Story
     XXVI   Mr. Brown
     XXVII  A Supper Party at the Savoy
     XXVIII And After




PROLOGUE

IT was 2 p.m. on the afternoon of May 7, 1915. The Lusitania had been
struck by two torpedoes in succession and was sinking rapidly, while
the boats were being launched with all possible speed. The women and
children were being lined up awaiting their turn. Some still clung
desperately to husbands and fathers; others clutched their children
closely to their breasts. One girl stood alone, slightly apart from
the rest. She was quite young, not more than eighteen. She did not seem
afraid, and her grave, steadfast eyes looked straight ahead.

"I beg your pardon."

A man's voice beside her made her start and turn. She had noticed the
speaker more than once amongst the first-class passengers. There had
been a hint of mystery about him which had appealed to her imagination.
He spoke to no one. If anyone spoke to him he was quick to rebuff the
overture. Also he had a nervous way of looking over his shoulder with a
swift, suspicious glance.

She noticed now that he was greatly agitated. There were beads of
perspiration on his brow. He was evidently in a state of overmastering
fear. And yet he did not strike her as the kind of man who would be
afraid to meet death!

"Yes?" Her grave eyes met his inquiringly.

He stood looking at her with a kind of desperate irresolution.

"It must be!" he muttered to himself. "Yes--it is the only way." Then
aloud he said abruptly: "You are an American?"

"Yes."

"A patriotic one?"

The girl flushed.

"I guess you've no right to ask such a thing! Of course I am!"

"Don't be offended. You wouldn't be if you knew how much there was at
stake. But I've got to trust some one--and it must be a woman."

"Why?"

"Because of 'women and children first.'" He looked round and lowered his
voice. "I'm carrying papers--vitally important papers. They may make all
the difference to the Allies in the war. You understand? These papers
have GOT to be saved! They've more chance with you than with me. Will
you take them?"

The girl held out her hand.

"Wait--I must warn you. There may be a risk--if I've been followed. I
don't think I have, but one never knows. If so, there will be danger.
Have you the nerve to go through with it?"

The girl smiled.

"I'll go through with it all right. And I'm real proud to be chosen!
What am I to do with them afterwards?"

"Watch the newspapers! I'll advertise in the personal column of the
Times, beginning 'Shipmate.' At the end of three days if there's
nothing--well, you'll know I'm down and out. Then take the packet to
the American Embassy, and deliver it into the Ambassador's own hands. Is
that clear?"

"Quite clear."

"Then be ready--I'm going to say good-bye." He took her hand in his.
"Good-bye. Good luck to you," he said in a louder tone.

Her hand closed on the oilskin packet that had lain in his palm.

The Lusitania settled with a more decided list to starboard. In answer
to a quick command, the girl went forward to take her place in the boat.



CHAPTER I. THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS, LTD.

"TOMMY, old thing!"

"Tuppence, old bean!"

The two young people greeted each other affectionately, and momentarily
blocked the Dover Street Tube exit in doing so. The adjective "old"
was misleading. Their united ages would certainly not have totalled
forty-five.

"Not seen you for simply centuries," continued the young man. "Where are
you off to? Come and chew a bun with me. We're getting a bit unpopular
here--blocking the gangway as it were. Let's get out of it."

The girl assenting, they started walking down Dover Street towards
Piccadilly.

"Now then," said Tommy, "where shall we go?"

The very faint anxiety which underlay his tone did not escape the astute
ears of Miss Prudence Cowley, known to her intimate friends for some
mysterious reason as "Tuppence." She pounced at once.

"Tommy, you're stony!"

"Not a bit of it," declared Tommy unconvincingly. "Rolling in cash."

"You always were a shocking liar," said Tuppence severely, "though you
did once persuade Sister Greenbank that the doctor had ordered you beer
as a tonic, but forgotten to write it on the chart. Do you remember?"

Tommy chuckled.

"I should think I did! Wasn't the old cat in a rage when she found
out? Not that she was a bad sort really, old Mother Greenbank! Good old
hospital--demobbed like everything else, I suppose?"

Tuppence sighed.

"Yes. You too?"

Tommy nodded.

"Two months ago."

"Gratuity?" hinted Tuppence.

"Spent."

"Oh, Tommy!"

"No, old thing, not in riotous dissipation. No such luck! The cost of
living--ordinary plain, or garden living nowadays is, I assure you, if
you do not know----"

"My dear child," interrupted Tuppence, "there is nothing I do NOT know
about the cost of living. Here we are at Lyons', and we will each of us
pay for our own. That's it!" And Tuppence led the way upstairs.

The place was full, and they wandered about looking for a table,
catching odds and ends of conversation as they did so.

"And--do you know, she sat down and CRIED when I told her she couldn't
have the flat after all." "It was simply a BARGAIN, my dear! Just like
the one Mabel Lewis brought from Paris----"

"Funny scraps one does overhear," murmured Tommy. "I passed two Johnnies
in the street to-day talking about some one called Jane Finn. Did you
ever hear such a name?"

But at that moment two elderly ladies rose and collected parcels, and
Tuppence deftly ensconced herself in one of the vacant seats.

Tommy ordered tea and buns. Tuppence ordered tea and buttered toast.

"And mind the tea comes in separate teapots," she added severely.

Tommy sat down opposite her. His bared head revealed a shock
of exquisitely slicked-back red hair. His face was pleasantly
ugly--nondescript, yet unmistakably the face of a gentleman and a
sportsman. His brown suit was well cut, but perilously near the end of
its tether.

They were an essentially modern-looking couple as they sat there.
Tuppence had no claim to beauty, but there was character and charm in
the elfin lines of her little face, with its determined chin and large,
wide-apart grey eyes that looked mistily out from under straight, black
brows. She wore a small bright green toque over her black bobbed hair,
and her extremely short and rather shabby skirt revealed a pair of
uncommonly dainty ankles. Her appearance presented a valiant attempt at
smartness.

The tea came at last, and Tuppence, rousing herself from a fit of
meditation, poured it out.

"Now then," said Tommy, taking a large bite of bun, "let's get
up-to-date. Remember, I haven't seen you since that time in hospital in
1916."

"Very well." Tuppence helped herself liberally to buttered toast.
"Abridged biography of Miss Prudence Cowley, fifth daughter of
Archdeacon Cowley of Little Missendell, Suffolk. Miss Cowley left the
delights (and drudgeries) of her home life early in the war and came up
to London, where she entered an officers' hospital. First month: Washed
up six hundred and forty-eight plates every day. Second month: Promoted
to drying aforesaid plates. Third month: Promoted to peeling potatoes.
Fourth month: Promoted to cutting bread and butter. Fifth month:
Promoted one floor up to duties of wardmaid with mop and pail. Sixth
month: Promoted to waiting at table. Seventh month: Pleasing appearance
and nice manners so striking that am promoted to waiting on the Sisters!
Eighth month: Slight check in career. Sister Bond ate Sister Westhaven's
egg! Grand row! Wardmaid clearly to blame! Inattention in such important
matters cannot be too highly censured. Mop and pail again! How are the
mighty fallen! Ninth month: Promoted to sweeping out wards, where I
found a friend of my childhood in Lieutenant Thomas Beresford (bow,
Tommy!), whom I had not seen for five long years. The meeting was
affecting! Tenth month: Reproved by matron for visiting the pictures in
company with one of the patients, namely: the aforementioned Lieutenant
Thomas Beresford. Eleventh and twelfth months: Parlourmaid duties
resumed with entire success. At the end of the year left hospital in a
blaze of glory. After that, the talented Miss Cowley drove successively
a trade delivery van, a motor-lorry and a general! The last was the
pleasantest. He was quite a young general!"

"What brighter was that?" inquired Tommy. "Perfectly sickening the way
those brass hats drove from the War Office to the Savoy, and from the
Savoy to the War Office!"

"I've forgotten his name now," confessed Tuppence. "To resume, that was
in a way the apex of my career. I next entered a Government office. We
had several very enjoyable tea parties. I had intended to become a
land girl, a postwoman, and a bus conductress by way of rounding off
my career--but the Armistice intervened! I clung to the office with the
true limpet touch for many long months, but, alas, I was combed out at
last. Since then I've been looking for a job. Now then--your turn."

"There's not so much promotion in mine," said Tommy regretfully, "and a
great deal less variety. I went out to France again, as you know. Then
they sent me to Mesopotamia, and I got wounded for the second time,
and went into hospital out there. Then I got stuck in Egypt till the
Armistice happened, kicked my heels there some time longer, and, as I
told you, finally got demobbed. And, for ten long, weary months I've
been job hunting! There aren't any jobs! And, if there were, they
wouldn't give 'em to me. What good am I? What do I know about business?
Nothing."

Tuppence nodded gloomily.

"What about the colonies?" she suggested.

Tommy shook his head.

"I shouldn't like the colonies--and I'm perfectly certain they wouldn't
like me!"

"Rich relations?"

Again Tommy shook his head.

"Oh, Tommy, not even a great-aunt?"

"I've got an old uncle who's more or less rolling, but he's no good."

"Why not?"

"Wanted to adopt me once. I refused."

"I think I remember hearing about it," said Tuppence slowly. "You
refused because of your mother----"

Tommy flushed.

"Yes, it would have been a bit rough on the mater. As you know, I was
all she had. Old boy hated her--wanted to get me away from her. Just a
bit of spite."

"Your mother's dead, isn't she?" said Tuppence gently.

Tommy nodded.

Tuppence's large grey eyes looked misty.

"You're a good sort, Tommy. I always knew it."

"Rot!" said Tommy hastily. "Well, that's my position. I'm just about
desperate."

"So am I! I've hung out as long as I could. I've touted round. I've
answered advertisements. I've tried every mortal blessed thing. I've
screwed and saved and pinched! But it's no good. I shall have to go
home!"

"Don't you want to?"

"Of course I don't want to! What's the good of being sentimental?
Father's a dear--I'm awfully fond of him--but you've no idea how I worry
him! He has that delightful early Victorian view that short skirts and
smoking are immoral. You can imagine what a thorn in the flesh I am to
him! He just heaved a sigh of relief when the war took me off. You see,
there are seven of us at home. It's awful! All housework and mothers'
meetings! I have always been the changeling. I don't want to go back,
but--oh, Tommy, what else is there to do?"

Tommy shook his head sadly. There was a silence, and then Tuppence burst
out:

"Money, money, money! I think about money morning, noon and night! I
dare say it's mercenary of me, but there it is!"

"Same here," agreed Tommy with feeling.

"I've thought over every imaginable way of getting it too," continued
Tuppence. "There are only three! To be left it, to marry it, or to make
it. First is ruled out. I haven't got any rich elderly relatives. Any
relatives I have are in homes for decayed gentlewomen! I always help old
ladies over crossings, and pick up parcels for old gentlemen, in case
they should turn out to be eccentric millionaires. But not one of them
has ever asked me my name--and quite a lot never said 'Thank you.'"

There was a pause.

"Of course," resumed Tuppence, "marriage is my best chance. I made up my
mind to marry money when I was quite young. Any thinking girl would!
I'm not sentimental, you know." She paused. "Come now, you can't say I'm
sentimental," she added sharply.

"Certainly not," agreed Tommy hastily. "No one would ever think of
sentiment in connection with you."

"That's not very polite," replied Tuppence. "But I dare say you mean it
all right. Well, there it is! I'm ready and willing--but I never meet
any rich men! All the boys I know are about as hard up as I am."

"What about the general?" inquired Tommy.

"I fancy he keeps a bicycle shop in time of peace," explained Tuppence.
"No, there it is! Now you could marry a rich girl."

"I'm like you. I don't know any."

"That doesn't matter. You can always get to know one. Now, if I see a
man in a fur coat come out of the Ritz I can't rush up to him and say:
'Look here, you're rich. I'd like to know you.'"

"Do you suggest that I should do that to a similarly garbed female?"

"Don't be silly. You tread on her foot, or pick up her handkerchief, or
something like that. If she thinks you want to know her she's flattered,
and will manage it for you somehow."

"You overrate my manly charms," murmured Tommy.

"On the other hand," proceeded Tuppence, "my millionaire would probably
run for his life! No--marriage is fraught with difficulties. Remains--to
MAKE money!"

"We've tried that, and failed," Tommy reminded her.

"We've tried all the orthodox ways, yes. But suppose we try the
unorthodox. Tommy, let's be adventurers!"

"Certainly," replied Tommy cheerfully. "How do we begin?"

"That's the difficulty. If we could make ourselves known, people might
hire us to commit crimes for them."

"Delightful," commented Tommy. "Especially coming from a clergyman's
daughter!"

"The moral guilt," Tuppence pointed out, "would be theirs--not mine. You
must admit that there's a difference between stealing a diamond necklace
for yourself and being hired to steal it."

"There wouldn't be the least difference if you were caught!"

"Perhaps not. But I shouldn't be caught. I'm so clever."

"Modesty always was your besetting sin," remarked Tommy.

"Don't rag. Look here, Tommy, shall we really? Shall we form a business
partnership?"

"Form a company for the stealing of diamond necklaces?"

"That was only an illustration. Let's have a--what do you call it in
book-keeping?"

"Don't know. Never did any."

"I have--but I always got mixed up, and used to put credit entries on
the debit side, and vice versa--so they fired me out. Oh, I know--a
joint venture! It struck me as such a romantic phrase to come across in
the middle of musty old figures. It's got an Elizabethan flavour about
it--makes one think of galleons and doubloons. A joint venture!"

"Trading under the name of the Young Adventurers, Ltd.? Is that your
idea, Tuppence?"

"It's all very well to laugh, but I feel there might be something in
it."

"How do you propose to get in touch with your would-be employers?"

"Advertisement," replied Tuppence promptly. "Have you got a bit of paper
and a pencil? Men usually seem to have. Just like we have hairpins and
powder-puffs."

Tommy handed over a rather shabby green notebook, and Tuppence began
writing busily.

"Shall we begin: 'Young officer, twice wounded in the war--'"

"Certainly not."

"Oh, very well, my dear boy. But I can assure you that that sort of
thing might touch the heart of an elderly spinster, and she might adopt
you, and then there would be no need for you to be a young adventurer at
all."

"I don't want to be adopted."

"I forgot you had a prejudice against it. I was only ragging you!
The papers are full up to the brim with that type of thing. Now
listen--how's this? 'Two young adventurers for hire. Willing to do
anything, go anywhere. Pay must be good.' (We might as well make
that clear from the start.) Then we might add: 'No reasonable offer
refused'--like flats and furniture."

"I should think any offer we get in answer to that would be a pretty
UNreasonable one!"

"Tommy! You're a genius! That's ever so much more chic. 'No unreasonable
offer refused--if pay is good.' How's that?"

"I shouldn't mention pay again. It looks rather eager."

"It couldn't look as eager as I feel! But perhaps you are right. Now
I'll read it straight through. 'Two young adventurers for hire. Willing
to do anything, go anywhere. Pay must be good. No unreasonable offer
refused.' How would that strike you if you read it?"

"It would strike me as either being a hoax, or else written by a
lunatic."

"It's not half so insane as a thing I read this morning beginning
'Petunia' and signed 'Best Boy.'" She tore out the leaf and handed it to
Tommy. "There you are. Times, I think. Reply to Box so-and-so. I expect
it will be about five shillings. Here's half a crown for my share."

Tommy was holding the paper thoughtfully. His faced burned a deeper red.

"Shall we really try it?" he said at last. "Shall we, Tuppence? Just for
the fun of the thing?"

"Tommy, you're a sport! I knew you would be! Let's drink to success."
She poured some cold dregs of tea into the two cups.

"Here's to our joint venture, and may it prosper!"

"The Young Adventurers, Ltd.!" responded Tommy.

They put down the cups and laughed rather uncertainly. Tuppence rose.

"I must return to my palatial suite at the hostel."

"Perhaps it is time I strolled round to the Ritz," agreed Tommy with a
grin. "Where shall we meet? And when?"

"Twelve o'clock to-morrow. Piccadilly Tube station. Will that suit you?"

"My time is my own," replied Mr. Beresford magnificently.

"So long, then."

"Good-bye, old thing."

The two young people went off in opposite directions. Tuppence's hostel
was situated in what was charitably called Southern Belgravia. For
reasons of economy she did not take a bus.

She was half-way across St. James's Park, when a man's voice behind her
made her start.

"Excuse me," it said. "But may I speak to you for a moment?"



CHAPTER II. MR. WHITTINGTON'S OFFER

TUPPENCE turned sharply, but the words hovering on the tip of her tongue
remained unspoken, for the man's appearance and manner did not bear out
her first and most natural assumption. She hesitated. As if he read her
thoughts, the man said quickly:

"I can assure you I mean no disrespect."

Tuppence believed him. Although she disliked and distrusted him
instinctively, she was inclined to acquit him of the particular motive
which she had at first attributed to him. She looked him up and down. He
was a big man, clean shaven, with a heavy jowl. His eyes were small and
cunning, and shifted their glance under her direct gaze.

"Well, what is it?" she asked.

The man smiled.

"I happened to overhear part of your conversation with the young
gentleman in Lyons'."

"Well--what of it?"

"Nothing--except that I think I may be of some use to you."

Another inference forced itself into Tuppence's mind:

"You followed me here?"

"I took that liberty."

"And in what way do you think you could be of use to me?"

The man took a card from his pocket and handed it to her with a bow.

Tuppence took it and scrutinized it carefully. It bore the inscription,
"Mr. Edward Whittington." Below the name were the words "Esthonia
Glassware Co.," and the address of a city office. Mr. Whittington spoke
again:

"If you will call upon me to-morrow morning at eleven o'clock, I will
lay the details of my proposition before you."

"At eleven o'clock?" said Tuppence doubtfully.

"At eleven o'clock."

Tuppence made up her mind.

"Very well. I'll be there."

"Thank you. Good evening."

He raised his hat with a flourish, and walked away. Tuppence remained
for some minutes gazing after him. Then she gave a curious movement of
her shoulders, rather as a terrier shakes himself.

"The adventures have begun," she murmured to herself. "What does he want
me to do, I wonder? There's something about you, Mr. Whittington, that I
don't like at all. But, on the other hand, I'm not the least bit afraid
of you. And as I've said before, and shall doubtless say again, little
Tuppence can look after herself, thank you!"

And with a short, sharp nod of her head she walked briskly onward. As a
result of further meditations, however, she turned aside from the direct
route and entered a post office. There she pondered for some moments,
a telegraph form in her hand. The thought of a possible five shillings
spent unnecessarily spurred her to action, and she decided to risk the
waste of ninepence.

Disdaining the spiky pen and thick, black treacle which a beneficent
Government had provided, Tuppence drew out Tommy's pencil which she had
retained and wrote rapidly: "Don't put in advertisement. Will explain
to-morrow." She addressed it to Tommy at his club, from which in one
short month he would have to resign, unless a kindly fortune permitted
him to renew his subscription.

"It may catch him," she murmured. "Anyway, it's worth trying."

After handing it over the counter she set out briskly for home, stopping
at a baker's to buy three penny-worth of new buns.

Later, in her tiny cubicle at the top of the house she munched buns and
reflected on the future. What was the Esthonia Glassware Co., and what
earthly need could it have for her services? A pleasurable thrill of
excitement made Tuppence tingle. At any rate, the country vicarage had
retreated into the background again. The morrow held possibilities.

It was a long time before Tuppence went to sleep that night, and, when
at length she did, she dreamed that Mr. Whittington had set her to
washing up a pile of Esthonia Glassware, which bore an unaccountable
resemblance to hospital plates!

It wanted some five minutes to eleven when Tuppence reached the block
of buildings in which the offices of the Esthonia Glassware Co. were
situated. To arrive before the time would look over-eager. So Tuppence
decided to walk to the end of the street and back again. She did so. On
the stroke of eleven she plunged into the recesses of the building.
The Esthonia Glassware Co. was on the top floor. There was a lift, but
Tuppence chose to walk up.

Slightly out of breath, she came to a halt outside the ground glass door
with the legend painted across it "Esthonia Glassware Co."

Tuppence knocked. In response to a voice from within, she turned the
handle and walked into a small rather dirty outer office.

A middle-aged clerk got down from a high stool at a desk near the window
and came towards her inquiringly.

"I have an appointment with Mr. Whittington," said Tuppence.

"Will you come this way, please." He crossed to a partition door with
"Private" on it, knocked, then opened the door and stood aside to let
her pass in.

Mr. Whittington was seated behind a large desk covered with papers.
Tuppence felt her previous judgment confirmed. There was something wrong
about Mr. Whittington. The combination of his sleek prosperity and his
shifty eye was not attractive.

He looked up and nodded.

"So you've turned up all right? That's good. Sit down, will you?"

Tuppence sat down on the chair facing him. She looked particularly small
and demure this morning. She sat there meekly with downcast eyes whilst
Mr. Whittington sorted and rustled amongst his papers. Finally he pushed
them away, and leaned over the desk.

"Now, my dear young lady, let us come to business." His large face
broadened into a smile. "You want work? Well, I have work to offer
you. What should you say now to L100 down, and all expenses paid?" Mr.
Whittington leaned back in his chair, and thrust his thumbs into the
arm-holes of his waistcoat.

Tuppence eyed him warily.

"And the nature of the work?" she demanded.

"Nominal--purely nominal. A pleasant trip, that is all."

"Where to?"

Mr. Whittington smiled again.

"Paris."

"Oh!" said Tuppence thoughtfully. To herself she said: "Of course,
if father heard that he would have a fit! But somehow I don't see Mr.
Whittington in the role of the gay deceiver."

"Yes," continued Whittington. "What could be more delightful? To put the
clock back a few years--a very few, I am sure--and re-enter one of those
charming pensionnats de jeunes filles with which Paris abounds----"

Tuppence interrupted him.

"A pensionnat?"

"Exactly. Madame Colombier's in the Avenue de Neuilly."

Tuppence knew the name well. Nothing could have been more select. She
had had several American friends there. She was more than ever puzzled.

"You want me to go to Madame Colombier's? For how long?"

"That depends. Possibly three months."

"And that is all? There are no other conditions?"

"None whatever. You would, of course, go in the character of my ward,
and you would hold no communication with your friends. I should have
to request absolute secrecy for the time being. By the way, you are
English, are you not?"

"Yes."

"Yet you speak with a slight American accent?"

"My great pal in hospital was a little American girl. I dare say I
picked it up from her. I can soon get out of it again."

"On the contrary, it might be simpler for you to pass as an American.
Details about your past life in England might be more difficult to
sustain. Yes, I think that would be decidedly better. Then----"

"One moment, Mr. Whittington! You seem to be taking my consent for
granted."

Whittington looked surprised.

"Surely you are not thinking of refusing? I can assure you that Madame
Colombier's is a most high-class and orthodox establishment. And the
terms are most liberal."

"Exactly," said Tuppence. "That's just it. The terms are almost too
liberal, Mr. Whittington. I cannot see any way in which I can be worth
that amount of money to you."

"No?" said Whittington softly. "Well, I will tell you. I could doubtless
obtain some one else for very much less. What I am willing to pay for
is a young lady with sufficient intelligence and presence of mind to
sustain her part well, and also one who will have sufficient discretion
not to ask too many questions."

Tuppence smiled a little. She felt that Whittington had scored.

"There's another thing. So far there has been no mention of Mr.
Beresford. Where does he come in?"

"Mr. Beresford?"

"My partner," said Tuppence with dignity. "You saw us together
yesterday."

"Ah, yes. But I'm afraid we shan't require his services."

"Then it's off!" Tuppence rose. "It's both or neither. Sorry--but that's
how it is. Good morning, Mr. Whittington."

"Wait a minute. Let us see if something can't be managed. Sit down
again, Miss----" He paused interrogatively.

Tuppence's conscience gave her a passing twinge as she remembered the
archdeacon. She seized hurriedly on the first name that came into her
head.

"Jane Finn," she said hastily; and then paused open-mouthed at the
effect of those two simple words.

All the geniality had faded out of Whittington's face. It was purple
with rage, and the veins stood out on the forehead. And behind it all
there lurked a sort of incredulous dismay. He leaned forward and hissed
savagely:

"So that's your little game, is it?"

Tuppence, though utterly taken aback, nevertheless kept her head. She
had not the faintest comprehension of his meaning, but she was naturally
quick-witted, and felt it imperative to "keep her end up" as she phrased
it.

Whittington went on:

"Been playing with me, have you, all the time, like a cat and mouse?
Knew all the time what I wanted you for, but kept up the comedy. Is that
it, eh?" He was cooling down. The red colour was ebbing out of his face.
He eyed her keenly. "Who's been blabbing? Rita?"

Tuppence shook her head. She was doubtful as to how long she could
sustain this illusion, but she realized the importance of not dragging
an unknown Rita into it.

"No," she replied with perfect truth. "Rita knows nothing about me."

His eyes still bored into her like gimlets.

"How much do you know?" he shot out.

"Very little indeed," answered Tuppence, and was pleased to note that
Whittington's uneasiness was augmented instead of allayed. To have
boasted that she knew a lot might have raised doubts in his mind.

"Anyway," snarled Whittington, "you knew enough to come in here and
plump out that name."

"It might be my own name," Tuppence pointed out.

"It's likely, isn't it, then there would be two girls with a name like
that?"

"Or I might just have hit upon it by chance," continued Tuppence,
intoxicated with the success of truthfulness.

Mr. Whittington brought his fist down upon the desk with a bang.

"Quit fooling! How much do you know? And how much do you want?"

The last five words took Tuppence's fancy mightily, especially after a
meagre breakfast and a supper of buns the night before. Her present part
was of the adventuress rather than the adventurous order, but she did
not deny its possibilities. She sat up and smiled with the air of one
who has the situation thoroughly well in hand.

"My dear Mr. Whittington," she said, "let us by all means lay our cards
upon the table. And pray do not be so angry. You heard me say yesterday
that I proposed to live by my wits. It seems to me that I have now
proved I have some wits to live by! I admit I have knowledge of a
certain name, but perhaps my knowledge ends there."

"Yes--and perhaps it doesn't," snarled Whittington.

"You insist on misjudging me," said Tuppence, and sighed gently.

"As I said once before," said Whittington angrily, "quit fooling, and
come to the point. You can't play the innocent with me. You know a great
deal more than you're willing to admit."

Tuppence paused a moment to admire her own ingenuity, and then said
softly:

"I shouldn't like to contradict you, Mr. Whittington."

"So we come to the usual question--how much?"

Tuppence was in a dilemma. So far she had fooled Whittington with
complete success, but to mention a palpably impossible sum might awaken
his suspicions. An idea flashed across her brain.

"Suppose we say a little something down, and a fuller discussion of the
matter later?"

Whittington gave her an ugly glance.

"Blackmail, eh?"

Tuppence smiled sweetly.

"Oh no! Shall we say payment of services in advance?"

Whittington grunted.

"You see," explained Tuppence still sweetly, "I'm so very fond of
money!"

"You're about the limit, that's what you are," growled Whittington, with
a sort of unwilling admiration. "You took me in all right. Thought you
were quite a meek little kid with just enough brains for my purpose."

"Life," moralized Tuppence, "is full of surprises."

"All the same," continued Whittington, "some one's been talking. You say
it isn't Rita. Was it----? Oh, come in."

The clerk followed his discreet knock into the room, and laid a paper at
his master's elbow.

"Telephone message just come for you, sir."

Whittington snatched it up and read it. A frown gathered on his brow.

"That'll do, Brown. You can go."

The clerk withdrew, closing the door behind him. Whittington turned to
Tuppence.

"Come to-morrow at the same time. I'm busy now. Here's fifty to go on
with."

He rapidly sorted out some notes, and pushed them across the table to
Tuppence, then stood up, obviously impatient for her to go.

The girl counted the notes in a businesslike manner, secured them in her
handbag, and rose.

"Good morning, Mr. Whittington," she said politely. "At least, au
revoir, I should say."

"Exactly. Au revoir!" Whittington looked almost genial again, a
reversion that aroused in Tuppence a faint misgiving. "Au revoir, my
clever and charming young lady."

Tuppence sped lightly down the stairs. A wild elation possessed her. A
neighbouring clock showed the time to be five minutes to twelve.

"Let's give Tommy a surprise!" murmured Tuppence, and hailed a taxi.

The cab drew up outside the tube station. Tommy was just within the
entrance. His eyes opened to their fullest extent as he hurried forward
to assist Tuppence to alight. She smiled at him affectionately, and
remarked in a slightly affected voice:

"Pay the thing, will you, old bean? I've got nothing smaller than a
five-pound note!"



CHAPTER III. A SET BACK

THE moment was not quite so triumphant as it ought to have been. To
begin with, the resources of Tommy's pockets were somewhat limited. In
the end the fare was managed, the lady recollecting a plebeian twopence,
and the driver, still holding the varied assortment of coins in his
hand, was prevailed upon to move on, which he did after one last hoarse
demand as to what the gentleman thought he was giving him?

"I think you've given him too much, Tommy," said Tuppence innocently. "I
fancy he wants to give some of it back."

It was possibly this remark which induced the driver to move away.

"Well," said Mr. Beresford, at length able to relieve his feelings,
"what the--dickens, did you want to take a taxi for?"

"I was afraid I might be late and keep you waiting," said Tuppence
gently.

"Afraid--you--might--be--late! Oh, Lord, I give it up!" said Mr.
Beresford.

"And really and truly," continued Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide,
"I haven't got anything smaller than a five-pound note."

"You did that part of it very well, old bean, but all the same the
fellow wasn't taken in--not for a moment!"

"No," said Tuppence thoughtfully, "he didn't believe it. That's the
curious part about speaking the truth. No one does believe it. I found
that out this morning. Now let's go to lunch. How about the Savoy?"

Tommy grinned.

"How about the Ritz?"

"On second thoughts, I prefer the Piccadilly. It's nearer. We shan't
have to take another taxi. Come along."

"Is this a new brand of humour? Or is your brain really unhinged?"
inquired Tommy.

"Your last supposition is the correct one. I have come into money, and
the shock has been too much for me! For that particular form of mental
trouble an eminent physician recommends unlimited Hors d'oeuvre, Lobster
a l'americane, Chicken Newberg, and Peche Melba! Let's go and get them!"

"Tuppence, old girl, what has really come over you?"

"Oh, unbelieving one!" Tuppence wrenched open her bag. "Look here, and
here, and here!"

"Great Jehosaphat! My dear girl, don't wave Fishers aloft like that!"

"They're not Fishers. They're five times better than Fishers, and this
one's ten times better!"

Tommy groaned.

"I must have been drinking unawares! Am I dreaming, Tuppence, or do I
really behold a large quantity of five-pound notes being waved about in
a dangerous fashion?"

"Even so, O King! Now, will you come and have lunch?"

"I'll come anywhere. But what have you been doing? Holding up a bank?"

"All in good time. What an awful place Piccadilly Circus is. There's a
huge bus bearing down on us. It would be too terrible if they killed the
five-pound notes!"

"Grill room?" inquired Tommy, as they reached the opposite pavement in
safety.

"The other's more expensive," demurred Tuppence.

"That's mere wicked wanton extravagance. Come on below."

"Are you sure I can get all the things I want there?"

"That extremely unwholesome menu you were outlining just now? Of course
you can--or as much as is good for you, anyway."

"And now tell me," said Tommy, unable to restrain his pent-up curiosity
any longer, as they sat in state surrounded by the many hors d'oeuvre of
Tuppence's dreams.

Miss Cowley told him.

"And the curious part of it is," she ended, "that I really did invent
the name of Jane Finn! I didn't want to give my own because of poor
father--in case I should get mixed up in anything shady."

"Perhaps that's so," said Tommy slowly. "But you didn't invent it."

"What?"

"No. I told it to you. Don't you remember, I said yesterday I'd
overheard two people talking about a female called Jane Finn? That's
what brought the name into your mind so pat."

"So you did. I remember now. How extraordinary----" Tuppence tailed off
into silence. Suddenly she aroused herself. "Tommy!"

"Yes?"

"What were they like, the two men you passed?"

Tommy frowned in an effort at remembrance.

"One was a big fat sort of chap. Clean shaven, I think--and dark."

"That's him," cried Tuppence, in an ungrammatical squeal. "That's
Whittington! What was the other man like?"

"I can't remember. I didn't notice him particularly. It was really the
outlandish name that caught my attention."

"And people say that coincidences don't happen!" Tuppence tackled her
Peche Melba happily.

But Tommy had become serious.

"Look here, Tuppence, old girl, what is this going to lead to?"

"More money," replied his companion.

"I know that. You've only got one idea in your head. What I mean is,
what about the next step? How are you going to keep the game up?"

"Oh!" Tuppence laid down her spoon. "You're right, Tommy, it is a bit of
a poser."

"After all, you know, you can't bluff him forever. You're sure to slip
up sooner or later. And, anyway, I'm not at all sure that it isn't
actionable--blackmail, you know."

"Nonsense. Blackmail is saying you'll tell unless you are given
money. Now, there's nothing I could tell, because I don't really know
anything."

"Hm," said Tommy doubtfully. "Well, anyway, what ARE we going to do?
Whittington was in a hurry to get rid of you this morning, but next time
he'll want to know something more before he parts with his money. He'll
want to know how much YOU know, and where you got your information from,
and a lot of other things that you can't cope with. What are you going
to do about it?"

Tuppence frowned severely.

"We must think. Order some Turkish coffee, Tommy. Stimulating to the
brain. Oh, dear, what a lot I have eaten!"

"You have made rather a hog of yourself! So have I for that matter, but
I flatter myself that my choice of dishes was more judicious than yours.
Two coffees." (This was to the waiter.) "One Turkish, one French."

Tuppence sipped her coffee with a deeply reflective air, and snubbed
Tommy when he spoke to her.

"Be quiet. I'm thinking."

"Shades of Pelmanism!" said Tommy, and relapsed into silence.

"There!" said Tuppence at last. "I've got a plan. Obviously what we've
got to do is to find out more about it all."

Tommy applauded.

"Don't jeer. We can only find out through Whittington. We must discover
where he lives, what he does--sleuth him, in fact! Now I can't do it,
because he knows me, but he only saw you for a minute or two in Lyons'.
He's not likely to recognize you. After all, one young man is much like
another."

"I repudiate that remark utterly. I'm sure my pleasing features and
distinguished appearance would single me out from any crowd."

"My plan is this," Tuppence went on calmly, "I'll go alone to-morrow.
I'll put him off again like I did to-day. It doesn't matter if I don't
get any more money at once. Fifty pounds ought to last us a few days."

"Or even longer!"

"You'll hang about outside. When I come out I shan't speak to you in
case he's watching. But I'll take up my stand somewhere near, and when
he comes out of the building I'll drop a handkerchief or something, and
off you go!"

"Off I go where?"

"Follow him, of course, silly! What do you think of the idea?"

"Sort of thing one reads about in books. I somehow feel that in real
life one will feel a bit of an ass standing in the street for hours with
nothing to do. People will wonder what I'm up to."

"Not in the city. Every one's in such a hurry. Probably no one will even
notice you at all."

"That's the second time you've made that sort of remark. Never mind, I
forgive you. Anyway, it will be rather a lark. What are you doing this
afternoon?"

"Well," said Tuppence meditatively. "I HAD thought of hats! Or perhaps
silk stockings! Or perhaps----"

"Hold hard," admonished Tommy. "There's a limit to fifty pounds! But
let's do dinner and a show to-night at all events."

"Rather."

The day passed pleasantly. The evening even more so. Two of the
five-pound notes were now irretrievably dead.

They met by arrangement the following morning and proceeded citywards.
Tommy remained on the opposite side of the road while Tuppence plunged
into the building.

Tommy strolled slowly down to the end of the street, then back again.
Just as he came abreast of the building, Tuppence darted across the
road.

"Tommy!"

"Yes. What's up?"

"The place is shut. I can't make anyone hear."

"That's odd."

"Isn't it? Come up with me, and let's try again."

Tommy followed her. As they passed the third floor landing a young clerk
came out of an office. He hesitated a moment, then addressed himself to
Tuppence.

"Were you wanting the Esthonia Glassware?"

"Yes, please."

"It's closed down. Since yesterday afternoon. Company being wound up,
they say. Not that I've ever heard of it myself. But anyway the office
is to let."

"Th--thank you," faltered Tuppence. "I suppose you don't know Mr.
Whittington's address?"

"Afraid I don't. They left rather suddenly."

"Thank you very much," said Tommy. "Come on, Tuppence."

They descended to the street again where they gazed at one another
blankly.

"That's torn it," said Tommy at length.

"And I never suspected it," wailed Tuppence.

"Cheer up, old thing, it can't be helped."

"Can't it, though!" Tuppence's little chin shot out defiantly. "Do you
think this is the end? If so, you're wrong. It's just the beginning!"

"The beginning of what?"

"Of our adventure! Tommy, don't you see, if they are scared enough to
run away like this, it shows that there must be a lot in this Jane Finn
business! Well, we'll get to the bottom of it. We'll run them down!
We'll be sleuths in earnest!"

"Yes, but there's no one left to sleuth."

"No, that's why we'll have to start all over again. Lend me that bit of
pencil. Thanks. Wait a minute--don't interrupt. There!" Tuppence handed
back the pencil, and surveyed the piece of paper on which she had
written with a satisfied eye:

"What's that?"

"Advertisement."

"You're not going to put that thing in after all?"

"No, it's a different one." She handed him the slip of paper.

Tommy read the words on it aloud:

"WANTED, any information respecting Jane Finn. Apply Y.A."



CHAPTER IV. WHO IS JANE FINN?

THE next day passed slowly. It was necessary to curtail expenditure.
Carefully husbanded, forty pounds will last a long time. Luckily the
weather was fine, and "walking is cheap," dictated Tuppence. An outlying
picture house provided them with recreation for the evening.

The day of disillusionment had been a Wednesday. On Thursday the
advertisement had duly appeared. On Friday letters might be expected to
arrive at Tommy's rooms.

He had been bound by an honourable promise not to open any such letters
if they did arrive, but to repair to the National Gallery, where his
colleague would meet him at ten o'clock.

Tuppence was first at the rendezvous. She ensconced herself on a red
velvet seat, and gazed at the Turners with unseeing eyes until she saw
the familiar figure enter the room.

"Well?"

"Well," returned Mr. Beresford provokingly. "Which is your favourite
picture?"

"Don't be a wretch. Aren't there ANY answers?"

Tommy shook his head with a deep and somewhat overacted melancholy.

"I didn't want to disappoint you, old thing, by telling you right off.
It's too bad. Good money wasted." He sighed. "Still, there it is. The
advertisement has appeared, and--there are only two answers!"

"Tommy, you devil!" almost screamed Tuppence. "Give them to me. How
could you be so mean!"

"Your language, Tuppence, your language! They're very particular at the
National Gallery. Government show, you know. And do remember, as I have
pointed out to you before, that as a clergyman's daughter----"

"I ought to be on the stage!" finished Tuppence with a snap.

"That is not what I intended to say. But if you are sure that you have
enjoyed to the full the reaction of joy after despair with which I have
kindly provided you free of charge, let us get down to our mail, as the
saying goes."

Tuppence snatched the two precious envelopes from him unceremoniously,
and scrutinized them carefully.

"Thick paper, this one. It looks rich. We'll keep it to the last and
open the other first."

"Right you are. One, two, three, go!"

Tuppence's little thumb ripped open the envelope, and she extracted the
contents.


"DEAR SIR,

"Referring to your advertisement in this morning's paper, I may be able
to be of some use to you. Perhaps you could call and see me at the above
address at eleven o'clock to-morrow morning.

"Yours truly,

"A. CARTER."


"27 Carshalton Gardens," said Tuppence, referring to the address.
"That's Gloucester Road way. Plenty of time to get there if we tube."

"The following," said Tommy, "is the plan of campaign. It is my turn to
assume the offensive. Ushered into the presence of Mr. Carter, he and I
wish each other good morning as is customary. He then says: 'Please take
a seat, Mr.--er?' To which I reply promptly and significantly: 'Edward
Whittington!' whereupon Mr. Carter turns purple in the face and gasps
out: 'How much?' Pocketing the usual fee of fifty pounds, I rejoin you
in the road outside, and we proceed to the next address and repeat the
performance."

"Don't be absurd, Tommy. Now for the other letter. Oh, this is from the
Ritz!"

"A hundred pounds instead of fifty!"

"I'll read it:

"DEAR SIR,

"Re your advertisement, I should be glad if you would call round
somewhere about lunch-time.

"Yours truly,

"JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER."


"Ha!" said Tommy. "Do I smell a Boche? Or only an American millionaire
of unfortunate ancestry? At all events we'll call at lunch-time. It's a
good time--frequently leads to free food for two."

Tuppence nodded assent.

"Now for Carter. We'll have to hurry."

Carshalton Terrace proved to be an unimpeachable row of what Tuppence
called "ladylike looking houses." They rang the bell at No. 27, and a
neat maid answered the door. She looked so respectable that Tuppence's
heart sank. Upon Tommy's request for Mr. Carter, she showed them into
a small study on the ground floor where she left them. Hardly a minute
elapsed, however, before the door opened, and a tall man with a lean
hawklike face and a tired manner entered the room.

"Mr. Y. A.?" he said, and smiled. His smile was distinctly attractive.
"Do sit down, both of you."

They obeyed. He himself took a chair opposite to Tuppence and smiled at
her encouragingly. There was something in the quality of his smile that
made the girl's usual readiness desert her.

As he did not seem inclined to open the conversation, Tuppence was
forced to begin.

"We wanted to know--that is, would you be so kind as to tell us anything
you know about Jane Finn?"

"Jane Finn? Ah!" Mr. Carter appeared to reflect. "Well, the question is,
what do you know about her?"

Tuppence drew herself up.

"I don't see that that's got anything to do with it."

"No? But it has, you know, really it has." He smiled again in his tired
way, and continued reflectively. "So that brings us down to it again.
What do you know about Jane Finn?

"Come now," he continued, as Tuppence remained silent. "You must know
SOMETHING to have advertised as you did?" He leaned forward a little,
his weary voice held a hint of persuasiveness. "Suppose you tell me..."

There was something very magnetic about Mr. Carter's personality.
Tuppence seemed to shake herself free of it with an effort, as she said:

"We couldn't do that, could we, Tommy?"

But to her surprise, her companion did not back her up. His eyes were
fixed on Mr. Carter, and his tone when he spoke held an unusual note of
deference.

"I dare say the little we know won't be any good to you, sir. But such
as it is, you're welcome to it."

"Tommy!" cried out Tuppence in surprise.

Mr. Carter slewed round in his chair. His eyes asked a question.

Tommy nodded.

"Yes, sir, I recognized you at once. Saw you in France when I was with
the Intelligence. As soon as you came into the room, I knew----"

Mr. Carter held up his hand.

"No names, please. I'm known as Mr. Carter here. It's my cousin's house,
by the way. She's willing to lend it to me sometimes when it's a case of
working on strictly unofficial lines. Well, now"--he looked from one to
the other--"who's going to tell me the story?"

"Fire ahead, Tuppence," directed Tommy. "It's your yarn."

"Yes, little lady, out with it."

And obediently Tuppence did out with it, telling the whole story from
the forming of the Young Adventurers, Ltd., downwards.

Mr. Carter listened in silence with a resumption of his tired manner.
Now and then he passed his hand across his lips as though to hide a
smile. When she had finished he nodded gravely.

"Not much. But suggestive. Quite suggestive. If you'll excuse my saying
so, you're a curious young couple. I don't know--you might succeed where
others have failed... I believe in luck, you know--always have...."

He paused a moment, and then went on.

"Well, how about it? You're out for adventure. How would you like
to work for me? All quite unofficial, you know. Expenses paid, and a
moderate screw?"

Tuppence gazed at him, her lips parted, her eyes growing wider and
wider.

"What should we have to do?" she breathed.

Mr. Carter smiled.

"Just go on with what you're doing now. FIND JANE FINN."

"Yes, but--who IS Jane Finn?"

Mr. Carter nodded gravely.

"Yes, you're entitled to know that, I think."

He leaned back in his chair, crossed his legs, brought the tips of his
fingers together, and began in a low monotone:

"Secret diplomacy (which, by the way, is nearly always bad policy!) does
not concern you. It will be sufficient to say that in the early days of
1915 a certain document came into being. It was the draft of a secret
agreement--treaty--call it what you like. It was drawn up ready for
signature by the various representatives, and drawn up in America--at
that time a neutral country. It was dispatched to England by a special
messenger selected for that purpose, a young fellow called Danvers. It
was hoped that the whole affair had been kept so secret that nothing
would have leaked out. That kind of hope is usually disappointed.
Somebody always talks!

"Danvers sailed for England on the Lusitania. He carried the precious
papers in an oilskin packet which he wore next his skin. It was on that
particular voyage that the Lusitania was torpedoed and sunk. Danvers was
among the list of those missing. Eventually his body was washed ashore,
and identified beyond any possible doubt. But the oilskin packet was
missing!

"The question was, had it been taken from him, or had he himself
passed it on into another's keeping? There were a few incidents that
strengthened the possibility of the latter theory. After the torpedo
struck the ship, in the few moments during the launching of the boats,
Danvers was seen speaking to a young American girl. No one actually
saw him pass anything to her, but he might have done so. It seems to me
quite likely that he entrusted the papers to this girl, believing that
she, as a woman, had a greater chance of bringing them safely to shore.

"But if so, where was the girl, and what had she done with the papers?
By later advice from America it seemed likely that Danvers had been
closely shadowed on the way over. Was this girl in league with his
enemies? Or had she, in her turn, been shadowed and either tricked or
forced into handing over the precious packet?

"We set to work to trace her out. It proved unexpectedly difficult.
Her name was Jane Finn, and it duly appeared among the list of the
survivors, but the girl herself seemed to have vanished completely.
Inquiries into her antecedents did little to help us. She was an orphan,
and had been what we should call over here a pupil teacher in a small
school out West. Her passport had been made out for Paris, where she
was going to join the staff of a hospital. She had offered her services
voluntarily, and after some correspondence they had been accepted.
Having seen her name in the list of the saved from the Lusitania, the
staff of the hospital were naturally very surprised at her not arriving
to take up her billet, and at not hearing from her in any way.

"Well, every effort was made to trace the young lady--but all in vain.
We tracked her across Ireland, but nothing could be heard of her after
she set foot in England. No use was made of the draft treaty--as might
very easily have been done--and we therefore came to the conclusion that
Danvers had, after all, destroyed it. The war entered on another phase,
the diplomatic aspect changed accordingly, and the treaty was never
redrafted. Rumours as to its existence were emphatically denied. The
disappearance of Jane Finn was forgotten and the whole affair was lost
in oblivion."

Mr. Carter paused, and Tuppence broke in impatiently:

"But why has it all cropped up again? The war's over."

A hint of alertness came into Mr. Carter's manner.

"Because it seems that the papers were not destroyed after all, and that
they might be resurrected to-day with a new and deadly significance."

Tuppence stared. Mr. Carter nodded.

"Yes, five years ago, that draft treaty was a weapon in our hands;
to-day it is a weapon against us. It was a gigantic blunder. If its
terms were made public, it would mean disaster.... It might possibly
bring about another war--not with Germany this time! That is an extreme
possibility, and I do not believe in its likelihood myself, but that
document undoubtedly implicates a number of our statesmen whom we cannot
afford to have discredited in any way at the present moment. As a party
cry for Labour it would be irresistible, and a Labour Government at this
juncture would, in my opinion, be a grave disability for British trade,
but that is a mere nothing to the REAL danger."

He paused, and then said quietly:

"You may perhaps have heard or read that there is Bolshevist influence
at work behind the present Labour unrest?"

Tuppence nodded.

"That is the truth. Bolshevist gold is pouring into this country for the
specific purpose of procuring a Revolution. And there is a certain man,
a man whose real name is unknown to us, who is working in the dark for
his own ends. The Bolshevists are behind the Labour unrest--but this
man is BEHIND THE BOLSHEVISTS. Who is he? We do not know. He is always
spoken of by the unassuming title of 'Mr. Brown.' But one thing is
certain, he is the master criminal of this age. He controls a marvellous
organization. Most of the Peace propaganda during the war was originated
and financed by him. His spies are everywhere."

"A naturalized German?" asked Tommy.

"On the contrary, I have every reason to believe he is an Englishman. He
was pro-German, as he would have been pro-Boer. What he seeks to attain
we do not know--probably supreme power for himself, of a kind unique in
history. We have no clue as to his real personality. It is reported that
even his own followers are ignorant of it. Where we have come across his
tracks, he has always played a secondary part. Somebody else assumes
the chief role. But afterwards we always find that there has been some
nonentity, a servant or a clerk, who has remained in the background
unnoticed, and that the elusive Mr. Brown has escaped us once more."

"Oh!" Tuppence jumped. "I wonder----"

"Yes?"

"I remember in Mr. Whittington's office. The clerk--he called him Brown.
You don't think----"

Carter nodded thoughtfully.

"Very likely. A curious point is that the name is usually mentioned. An
idiosyncrasy of genius. Can you describe him at all?"

"I really didn't notice. He was quite ordinary--just like anyone else."

Mr. Carter sighed in his tired manner.

"That is the invariable description of Mr. Brown! Brought a telephone
message to the man Whittington, did he? Notice a telephone in the outer
office?"

Tuppence thought.

"No, I don't think I did."

"Exactly. That 'message' was Mr. Brown's way of giving an order to his
subordinate. He overheard the whole conversation of course. Was it after
that that Whittington handed you over the money, and told you to come
the following day?"

Tuppence nodded.

"Yes, undoubtedly the hand of Mr. Brown!" Mr. Carter paused. "Well,
there it is, you see what you are pitting yourselves against? Possibly
the finest criminal brain of the age. I don't quite like it, you know.
You're such young things, both of you. I shouldn't like anything to
happen to you."

"It won't," Tuppence assured him positively.

"I'll look after her, sir," said Tommy.

"And I'll look after YOU," retorted Tuppence, resenting the manly
assertion.

"Well, then, look after each other," said Mr. Carter, smiling. "Now
let's get back to business. There's something mysterious about this
draft treaty that we haven't fathomed yet. We've been threatened with
it--in plain and unmistakable terms. The Revolutionary element as good
as declare that it's in their hands, and that they intend to produce it
at a given moment. On the other hand, they are clearly at fault about
many of its provisions. The Government consider it as mere bluff
on their part, and, rightly or wrongly, have stuck to the policy of
absolute denial. I'm not so sure. There have been hints, indiscreet
allusions, that seem to indicate that the menace is a real one. The
position is much as though they had got hold of an incriminating
document, but couldn't read it because it was in cipher--but we know
that the draft treaty wasn't in cipher--couldn't be in the nature of
things--so that won't wash. But there's SOMETHING. Of course, Jane Finn
may be dead for all we know--but I don't think so. The curious thing is
that THEY'RE TRYING TO GET INFORMATION ABOUT THE GIRL FROM US."

"What?"

"Yes. One or two little things have cropped up. And your story, little
lady, confirms my idea. They know we're looking for Jane Finn. Well,
they'll produce a Jane Finn of their own--say at a pensionnat in Paris."
Tuppence gasped, and Mr. Carter smiled. "No one knows in the least what
she looks like, so that's all right. She's primed with a trumped-up
tale, and her real business is to get as much information as possible
out of us. See the idea?"

"Then you think"--Tuppence paused to grasp the supposition fully--"that
it WAS as Jane Finn that they wanted me to go to Paris?"

Mr. Carter smiled more wearily than ever.

"I believe in coincidences, you know," he said.



CHAPTER V. MR. JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER


"WELL," said Tuppence, recovering herself, "it really seems as though it
were meant to be."

Carter nodded.

"I know what you mean. I'm superstitious myself. Luck, and all that sort
of thing. Fate seems to have chosen you out to be mixed up in this."

Tommy indulged in a chuckle.

"My word! I don't wonder Whittington got the wind up when Tuppence
plumped out that name! I should have myself. But look here, sir, we're
taking up an awful lot of your time. Have you any tips to give us before
we clear out?"

"I think not. My experts, working in stereotyped ways, have failed.
You will bring imagination and an open mind to the task. Don't be
discouraged if that too does not succeed. For one thing there is a
likelihood of the pace being forced."

Tuppence frowned uncomprehendingly.

"When you had that interview with Whittington, they had time before
them. I have information that the big coup was planned for early in the
new year. But the Government is contemplating legislative action which
will deal effectually with the strike menace. They'll get wind of it
soon, if they haven't already, and it's possible that that may bring
things to a head. I hope it will myself. The less time they have to
mature their plans the better. I'm just warning you that you haven't
much time before you, and that you needn't be cast down if you fail.
It's not an easy proposition anyway. That's all."

Tuppence rose.

"I think we ought to be businesslike. What exactly can we count upon you
for, Mr. Carter?" Mr. Carter's lips twitched slightly, but he replied
succinctly: "Funds within reason, detailed information on any point, and
NO OFFICIAL RECOGNITION. I mean that if you get yourselves into trouble
with the police, I can't officially help you out of it. You're on your
own."

Tuppence nodded sagely.

"I quite understand that. I'll write out a list of the things I want to
know when I've had time to think. Now--about money----"

"Yes, Miss Tuppence. Do you want to say how much?"

"Not exactly. We've got plenty to go with for the present, but when we
want more----"

"It will be waiting for you."

"Yes, but--I'm sure I don't want to be rude about the Government if
you've got anything to do with it, but you know one really has the devil
of a time getting anything out of it! And if we have to fill up a blue
form and send it in, and then, after three months, they send us a green
one, and so on--well, that won't be much use, will it?"

Mr. Carter laughed outright.

"Don't worry, Miss Tuppence. You will send a personal demand to me here,
and the money, in notes, shall be sent by return of post. As to salary,
shall we say at the rate of three hundred a year? And an equal sum for
Mr. Beresford, of course."

Tuppence beamed upon him.

"How lovely. You are kind. I do love money! I'll keep beautiful accounts
of our expenses all debit and credit, and the balance on the right side,
and red line drawn sideways with the totals the same at the bottom. I
really know how to do it when I think."

"I'm sure you do. Well, good-bye, and good luck to you both."

He shook hands with them, and in another minute they were descending the
steps of 27 Carshalton Terrace with their heads in a whirl.

"Tommy! Tell me at once, who is 'Mr. Carter'?"

Tommy murmured a name in her ear.

"Oh!" said Tuppence, impressed.

"And I can tell you, old bean, he's IT!"

"Oh!" said Tuppence again. Then she added reflectively,

"I like him, don't you? He looks so awfully tired and bored, and yet you
feel that underneath he's just like steel, all keen and flashing. Oh!"
She gave a skip. "Pinch me, Tommy, do pinch me. I can't believe it's
real!"

Mr. Beresford obliged.

"Ow! That's enough! Yes, we're not dreaming. We've got a job!"

"And what a job! The joint venture has really begun."

"It's more respectable than I thought it would be," said Tuppence
thoughtfully.

"Luckily I haven't got your craving for crime! What time is it? Let's
have lunch--oh!"

The same thought sprang to the minds of each. Tommy voiced it first.

"Julius P. Hersheimmer!"

"We never told Mr. Carter about hearing from him."

"Well, there wasn't much to tell--not till we've seen him. Come on, we'd
better take a taxi."

"Now who's being extravagant?"

"All expenses paid, remember. Hop in."

"At any rate, we shall make a better effect arriving this way," said
Tuppence, leaning back luxuriously. "I'm sure blackmailers never arrive
in buses!"

"We've ceased being blackmailers," Tommy pointed out.

"I'm not sure I have," said Tuppence darkly.

On inquiring for Mr. Hersheimmer, they were at once taken up to his
suite. An impatient voice cried "Come in" in answer to the page-boy's
knock, and the lad stood aside to let them pass in.

Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer was a great deal younger than either Tommy or
Tuppence had pictured him. The girl put him down as thirty-five. He
was of middle height, and squarely built to match his jaw. His face was
pugnacious but pleasant. No one could have mistaken him for anything but
an American, though he spoke with very little accent.

"Get my note? Sit down and tell me right away all you know about my
cousin."

"Your cousin?"

"Sure thing. Jane Finn."

"Is she your cousin?"

"My father and her mother were brother and sister," explained Mr.
Hersheimmer meticulously.

"Oh!" cried Tuppence. "Then you know where she is?"

"No!" Mr. Hersheimmer brought down his fist with a bang on the table.
"I'm darned if I do! Don't you?"

"We advertised to receive information, not to give it," said Tuppence
severely.

"I guess I know that. I can read. But I thought maybe it was her back
history you were after, and that you'd know where she was now?"

"Well, we wouldn't mind hearing her back history," said Tuppence
guardedly.

But Mr. Hersheimmer seemed to grow suddenly suspicious.

"See here," he declared. "This isn't Sicily! No demanding ransom or
threatening to crop her ears if I refuse. These are the British Isles,
so quit the funny business, or I'll just sing out for that beautiful big
British policeman I see out there in Piccadilly."

Tommy hastened to explain.

"We haven't kidnapped your cousin. On the contrary, we're trying to find
her. We're employed to do so."

Mr. Hersheimmer leant back in his chair.

"Put me wise," he said succinctly.

Tommy fell in with this demand in so far as he gave him a guarded
version of the disappearance of Jane Finn, and of the possibility of her
having been mixed up unawares in "some political show." He alluded to
Tuppence and himself as "private inquiry agents" commissioned to find
her, and added that they would therefore be glad of any details Mr.
Hersheimmer could give them.

That gentleman nodded approval.

"I guess that's all right. I was just a mite hasty. But London gets my
goat! I only know little old New York. Just trot out your questions and
I'll answer."

For the moment this paralysed the Young Adventurers, but Tuppence,
recovering herself, plunged boldly into the breach with a reminiscence
culled from detective fiction.

"When did you last see the dece--your cousin, I mean?"

"Never seen her," responded Mr. Hersheimmer.

"What?" demanded Tommy, astonished.

Hersheimmer turned to him.

"No, sir. As I said before, my father and her mother were brother and
sister, just as you might be"--Tommy did not correct this view of their
relationship--"but they didn't always get on together. And when my aunt
made up her mind to marry Amos Finn, who was a poor school teacher out
West, my father was just mad! Said if he made his pile, as he seemed
in a fair way to do, she'd never see a cent of it. Well, the upshot was
that Aunt Jane went out West and we never heard from her again.

"The old man DID pile it up. He went into oil, and he went into steel,
and he played a bit with railroads, and I can tell you he made Wall
Street sit up!" He paused. "Then he died--last fall--and I got the
dollars. Well, would you believe it, my conscience got busy! Kept
knocking me up and saying: What about your Aunt Jane, way out West?
It worried me some. You see, I figured it out that Amos Finn would never
make good. He wasn't the sort. End of it was, I hired a man to hunt her
down. Result, she was dead, and Amos Finn was dead, but they'd left
a daughter--Jane--who'd been torpedoed in the Lusitania on her way to
Paris. She was saved all right, but they didn't seem able to hear of her
over this side. I guessed they weren't hustling any, so I thought I'd
come along over, and speed things up. I phoned Scotland Yard and the
Admiralty first thing. The Admiralty rather choked me off, but Scotland
Yard were very civil--said they would make inquiries, even sent a man
round this morning to get her photograph. I'm off to Paris to-morrow,
just to see what the Prefecture is doing. I guess if I go to and fro
hustling them, they ought to get busy!"

The energy of Mr. Hersheimmer was tremendous. They bowed before it.

"But say now," he ended, "you're not after her for anything? Contempt of
court, or something British? A proud-spirited young American girl might
find your rules and regulations in war time rather irksome, and get up
against it. If that's the case, and there's such a thing as graft in
this country, I'll buy her off."

Tuppence reassured him.

"That's good. Then we can work together. What about some lunch? Shall we
have it up here, or go down to the restaurant?"

Tuppence expressed a preference for the latter, and Julius bowed to her
decision.

Oysters had just given place to Sole Colbert when a card was brought to
Hersheimmer.

"Inspector Japp, C.I.D. Scotland Yard again. Another man this time. What
does he expect I can tell him that I didn't tell the first chap? I hope
they haven't lost that photograph. That Western photographer's place was
burned down and all his negatives destroyed--this is the only copy in
existence. I got it from the principal of the college there."

An unformulated dread swept over Tuppence.

"You--you don't know the name of the man who came this morning?"

"Yes, I do. No, I don't. Half a second. It was on his card. Oh, I know!
Inspector Brown. Quiet, unassuming sort of chap."



CHAPTER VI. A PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

A veil might with profit be drawn over the events of the next half-hour.
Suffice it to say that no such person as "Inspector Brown" was known to
Scotland Yard. The photograph of Jane Finn, which would have been of
the utmost value to the police in tracing her, was lost beyond recovery.
Once again "Mr. Brown" had triumphed.

The immediate result of this set back was to effect a rapprochement
between Julius Hersheimmer and the Young Adventurers. All barriers went
down with a crash, and Tommy and Tuppence felt they had known the young
American all their lives. They abandoned the discreet reticence of
"private inquiry agents," and revealed to him the whole history of
the joint venture, whereat the young man declared himself "tickled to
death."

He turned to Tuppence at the close of the narration.

"I've always had a kind of idea that English girls were just a mite
moss-grown. Old-fashioned and sweet, you know, but scared to move round
without a footman or a maiden aunt. I guess I'm a bit behind the times!"

The upshot of these confidential relations was that Tommy and Tuppence
took up their abode forthwith at the Ritz, in order, as Tuppence put it,
to keep in touch with Jane Finn's only living relation. "And put like
that," she added confidentially to Tommy, "nobody could boggle at the
expense!"

Nobody did, which was the great thing.

"And now," said the young lady on the morning after their installation,
"to work!"

Mr. Beresford put down the Daily Mail, which he was reading, and
applauded with somewhat unnecessary vigour. He was politely requested by
his colleague not to be an ass.

"Dash it all, Tommy, we've got to DO something for our money."

Tommy sighed.

"Yes, I fear even the dear old Government will not support us at the
Ritz in idleness for ever."

"Therefore, as I said before, we must DO something."

"Well," said Tommy, picking up the Daily Mail again, "DO it. I shan't
stop you."

"You see," continued Tuppence. "I've been thinking----"

She was interrupted by a fresh bout of applause.

"It's all very well for you to sit there being funny, Tommy. It would do
you no harm to do a little brain work too."

"My union, Tuppence, my union! It does not permit me to work before 11
a.m."

"Tommy, do you want something thrown at you? It is absolutely essential
that we should without delay map out a plan of campaign."

"Hear, hear!"

"Well, let's do it."

Tommy laid his paper finally aside. "There's something of the simplicity